okay so welcome everybody and this
is a talk i put together about some very
new news
in astronomy which is the discovery
in january that was announced of the
gravitational wave
background and to set the scene first of
all
i'm going to talk about the cosmic
microwave background
which we've known about for many years
we've discovered in the
uh 60s i believe late 60s
and the cosmic microwave backgrounds
this image here
this rugby ball shape uh shows
the variations in intensity of the
afterglow from 3800 years after the big
bang so when the universe was
very young but not right from the very
very beginning
this was the point at which the
temperature of the universe
dropped to about the same as the surface
of a red giant star
and finally became uh transparent to
visible light
now we always see it as that rugby ball
shape
because what they've really done is
unwrapped the two hemispheres
of a sphere that uh is what we see
looking in all possible directions so
another way of showing the same
is as two circles like this but that
rugby ball shape is
the same it's the equivalent of what
they do when they take a
globe of the earth and map all the
continents
out and unwrap it onto a flat sheet
really
and this story all started with these
two gentlemen
penzias and wilson in uh bell labs
who were worrying about
a pesky noise that they couldn't get rid
of in their communication
system and they you were using the big
horn antenna that you see behind them in
the picture there
to study that the source of this
interference would seem to be
getting into their equipment and it
didn't seem to matter which direction
they pointed their antenna
they were always getting the same noise
coming into the system
eventually they were put in touch with a
couple of astronomers
from the theoretical side from the west
coast who had predicted
exactly this sort of effect of a noise
in the radio part of the spectrum that
would be
left over from the big bang and the two
compared notes and the discovery was
made
of this microwave radiation that
seems to be coming from all over the sky
at a temperature of 2.7 degrees
kelvin so very cold radiation but not
sort of emitted as such when it was
emitted it was emitted at a temperature
of around
3000 degrees the temperature of red hot
and what of course has happened in the
intervening time
is that it has been stretched by the
expansion of the universe
the amazing fit between the theory and
the data is shown in this graph here
the red dots are the intensity of the
radiation according to the microwave
frequency
and a perfect black body radiator would
produce the green line
so the fit is extraordinary and when we
say 2.7 degrees that's
the measured by measuring where the peak
is
and as a body gets hotter
the peak in the radiation moves to
higher and higher energies
and so it sweeps up through infrared and
into the
visible part of the spectrum or even
beyond
but this was emitted in the
spectrum as red light fundamentally
red and infrared but because of the
expansion of the universe the
wavelength has been stretched by a
factor approaching
uh 2000 times and
that has reduced the energy of the light
from
the visible part of the spectrum right
down into the fairly low
energy low temperature equivalent
microwaves
now we'll come back at the end of the
talk to the cosmic microwave background
because it links in to the
subject that we're really going to talk
about today
and that is gravity waves gravity waves
are an entirely different
form of transmitted energy
they're not carried by the
electromagnetic force
but by ripples in space-time
einstein showed that a mass
will create a curvature in space
as shown in the first picture here with
the earth creating a
a divert in the uh shape of the fabric
of space-time
around it but moving objects will create
a moving
uh change in the space and accelerating
objects
can emit a gravity wave
and a good example of that is a pair of
objects
orbiting closely around each other that
will emit
a traveling gravity wave in the form of
the spiral of radiation
and that gravity waves move at the speed
of light
they are subject to the same laws
of uh general relativity so they move at
the same speed
and they carry energy away from such
situations
and so two objects such as a pair of
neutron stars or
as in the picture at the bottom a pair
of black holes
orbiting each other will gradually lose
energy as they radiate away this this
gravitational wave energy
and so they spiral inwards and
eventually they collide and merge
there's a good animation here a
simulation of a pair of black holes
orbiting each other and eventually
merging
and it's on repeat of course and what we
are looking at
is the simulation of the black holes
themselves
as the dark regions in the center there
one big one and one small one
and the distortion of space-time
that they are creating as they spiral
together
creating that rippling and shimmying
look
of the background of stars from behind
them
showing how their gravity is distorting
the fabric of space-time
and you can also see the ripples almost
traveling outwards
until after the merger when everything
settles down because the
system becomes completely symmetrical at
that point
and gravity waves are caused by an
asymmetry in
uh accelerating uh fields
they're also a little bit strange in
that they aren't a
dipole as in a positive and a negative
that we have with electromagnetism
they're a quadrupole
field which means that the oscillation
is as shown in the little animation
it's going from tall thin to short fat
and back again
and so as a gravity wave passes through
you you would do the same thing you
become a bit taller and thinner and then
a bit shorter and fatter
as the wave passes through you
and that shape is trying to be shown by
the mesh diagram on the left there
doesn't really but it affects how you go
about detecting them
and the way you do it is to take
advantage of this quadrupole
check uh field shape and build a
detector like
ligo the laser interferometer gravity
wave observatory
which has these two four kilometer long
arms
uh stretching away at right angles from
the central laboratory
and a laser beam is generated in the
central lab
and split with a partially silvered
mirror
half is sent down each arm to reflectors
at the far end
and then the beam comes back and is
recombined in the lab
in fact it goes up and down the the tube
times to increase that four kilometer
path length dramatically
and that's in order to get enough
sensitivity
so that when a gravity wave passes
through and makes
one of the arms uh stretch while the
other one
shrinks a bit due to that quadrupole
shape
uh it's inevitable with this layout that
they will
change in the opposite sense because
they're at right angles to each other
and they're looking for a shift in the
path length
and therefore a difference in the
arrival time
back at the central observatory of the
laser light
that corresponds to a change in the path
length
of 1 100 of the width of a proton which
is incredibly tiny
but amazingly they've managed to do it
it was announced in 2016. now in fact
they built ligo
first and ran it for a while
and found nothing that was detectable
above the
noise floor and had to go back and
give it an upgrade to ligo mark 2
with more sensitive equipment and
more noise isolation for the mirrors
and so on because otherwise they were
being disrupted by
the passing of trains 10 miles away
that were causing more shaking of the
equipment than
the gravity waves themselves we also
built two of them
one in the southern united states in
louisiana
and one up at hanford in washington
state near seattle up in the top
left-hand corner
so several thousand miles apart and that
was so that they could
tell if they got the same signal in both
that it wasn't
of local origin it must be coming from
somewhere
much further away and therefore probably
out in space
and so after the upgrade they turned it
on
and here's the data we from hanford we
got this trace
from livingston in louisiana this trace
you put the two together and they fit
very very neatly
and it is indeed two black holes merging
and coming back together and that's the
noise i don't know if you can hear that
i'll let it run again but the uh sound
can be derived from these wobbles there
it is
i'll not talk over it this time it
starts as a very low note
and gets higher here we go
so you hear that rip noise and that was
a 30 solar mass and a 40 solar mass
black hole merging with each other and
you would think that would create a 70
solar mass black hole
but it didn't it created a 65 solar mass
black hole
because five solar masses were converted
into pure energy
by e equals m c squared and carried away
as gravity waves it was many billions of
light years away from us
and so the signal was much diluted by
the time it arrived at earth
but it was detectable let's hear it
again
there we go so that was ligo here they
are
on on the map ligo livingston and ligo
hanford
almost as far apart in the us as you
could get
um and that separation and the fact
there were two of them
is very useful but it really could do
with a third observatory
which would allow them to triangulate in
3d and isolate where
on the sky exactly things are coming
from
and so under construction we have some
new observatories so there's a plan for
one in india
another ligo which will give them those
three
and of course they don't it doesn't
matter if the earth's in the way because
the gravity waves go straight through
the earth
so they can be on opposite sides but uh
here's virgo which is a european effort
in italy
and a smaller version geo here in
germany
that have gone operational now in fact
virgo is now operational and there's
another one being built in japan
and so the combination of these gives us
a
excellent distribution of uh possible
orientations and the ability to pin down
events
coming from anywhere in the universe so
ligo and virgo have been operating
together for
about a year now and between them
they've detected
more than 50 of these black hole mergers
of a range of different sizes from
similar to the tens of solar masses
of the first case to uh hundreds of
solar masses at the top end and
just a few at the bottom they've also
because
of the extra sensitivity that having
that much longer baseline between the
observatories
gives them being able to detect many
cases
of merging neutron stars where you've
really only got
a couple of solar masses of material
involved so the waves are much weaker
so the next step for all of this
observing of gravity waves is going to
be
lisa which is a space interferometer
and they're going to launch three
spacecraft which will sit
in a large triangle out in space well
away from the earth
and again shoot laser beams around this
equilateral triangle
giving them arms not four kilometers
long but arms a million kilometers long
and so they will be able to make uh
detections
of gravity waves of a much longer
wavelength
and that'll enable us to start looking
at new classes of events
in particular what's going to be very
interesting is to
look for the mergers of supermassive
black holes
that live within the nuclei of galaxies
most galaxies have one
or possibly more than one supermassive
black hole with
a billion or a million solar masses uh
the one in the center of the milky way
is four million solar masses and it's a
relatively
small lightweight one um but
galaxies merge together and inevitably
the
black holes their supermassive black
holes will
end up at the center and eventually they
will merge
and it would be very very interesting to
detect that
but because of the much larger masses
involved and the
slower accelerations that result
the dynamics of this mean that the
wavelength of the gravity waves will be
millions or even
billions of kilometers long and that
corresponds to frequencies
of less than 1 hertz so 0.3 of a hertz
down to
0.0003 hertz
so we'll have to upscale it quite
considerably to put it in the audio
range
the ones we're detecting at the moment
are naturally um
in the range sort of of uh hundreds to
ten thousand uh hertz and therefore
actually very easy to transform the
ripples into an audio signal like we
were listening to
so that's uh coming up elisa
spacecraft but i need to go back to
a little word about neutron stars just
to set the scene for the next bit
neutron stars are the one of the results
of
an exploding large giant star
uh typically giant stars in the range 10
and a half to about 18
solar masses will blow up as a type 2
core collapse
supernova when they run out of fuel
and that's what's happened here in the
crab nebula which this animation shows
expanding outwards from the center
and in the center there is a neutron
star
a collapsed ball of compressed matter
that was the core of the progenitor star
the outer layers have blasted away and
the center being
compressed down to an enormously dense
object probably has a mass
of around one to two solar masses
compressed into a ball the size of new
york city
and the result of that is that it's the
same density
as the atomic nucleus
to put it in human terms a teaspoonful
would weigh 1 billion
tons if you could weigh a teaspoon full
of neutron star matter
quite incredible density it's had all of
the uh
electrons and protons that were making
up
the the elements the hydrogen and so on
compressed together and turned into
neutrons and then really collapsed into
what is a giant
nucleus of element number zero made
entirely of neutrons
doesn't collapse any further because the
neutrons repel each other by a quantum
mechanical process
which we won't go into now but it
will sustain a ball of neutrons up to
around three
solar masses uh at which point gravity
overwhelms even the neutron pressure
that
holds these neutron stars from
collapsing and that's
when things go on eventually to form a
black hole
but the key point about these neutron
stars is that they spin very rapidly
and they spin because of the
conservation of angular momentum as
a skater goes into a spin and then pulls
their arms in
um they bring all the mass to the center
and they spin
up to a much higher rate of spin and
that's what's happened here the core
of the rotating star has shrunk inwards
all the mass is now in the middle so to
conserve angular momentum the speed has
to increase
and the rapid rotation whips up a
magnetic field
and often that creates a radiation beam
which spins around because the magnetic
fields often not perfectly aligned
with the rotation axis as is the case
with the earth
and a beam of radio waves is shot out
along the uh
magnetic axis and if these sweep across
the earth then we hear
the pulses of radiation arriving as the
beam
points at us uh repeatedly and that was
discovered by
dame jocelyn bell bonnell here in
cambridge in 1967
on the 28th of november she was using
the radio telescope not the one behind
her which
actually looks like a radio telescope
but this one that looks like a farmer
growing hops
this is the ips array
which was the design of her professor at
the time
tony hewish and as just a lot of wires
stuck on sticks in the middle of a nine
acre field
you couldn't aim it you just had to wait
for the rotation of the earth to point
the
thing in the right direction uh but it
picked up the signal
and here's the trace of the signal and i
know this very well because one of the
projects i worked on as an undergraduate
at cambridge
was to measure these blips on miles and
miles of paper tape
very carefully to look for any variation
over time
of the interval between them
they were coming in at 1.3373
second intervals that's what each of
these blips means
and we're so stable in fact
in 1980 i managed to find no change
whatsoever in them
which was the result of uh weeks of
project work
um down to about 10 decimal places
so stable that they thought they might
be artificial in origin originally
and so somewhat tongue-in-cheek jocelyn
labelled them
lgm1 meaning little green men
signal number one and uh
obviously she didn't actually think that
they were going to be the signals of
aliens but they looked so regular that
uh
they seem to fit the criteria now we can
listen to
uh the sound not of this pulsar the
first one but
another one that she discovered shortly
afterwards
this is the crab pulsar in the crab
nebula
if you can hear that noise it's about
30 per second so
considerably faster spin than the first
one
but it's by no means the fastest some
other pulsars
spin at other rates here's another one
which
perhaps a slower one and you can see
the trace and here the blips i hope if i
stop talking for a moment
and see also the flashing of the light
because we've caught it in the optical
as well down here
i'll stop talking and you can listen
so there's a sound of another pulsar
i've got a third one for you
this one's a really fast one it spins
174 times a second
so that's the result of a millisecond
pulsar
now they make such good clocks because
they spin so accurately you can imagine
a two solar mass lump of uh material
spinning
maybe 200 times a second will take some
perturbing it's
quite an impressive gyroscope after all
um and this was
uh utilized on the gold disc that was
sent out
on the voyager spacecraft and the this
spidery diagram here shows the earth
and the direction and angle and distance
to different pulsars in the universe
and it's basically saying we are here
because
the idea was if any alien civilization
picked up this disc they would be able
to decode the signal
and the information encoded as little
ones and zeros
all along the paths here and work out
the distance
angle and the timing crucially
of the pulsars if they managed to figure
out that's what it was
and the key to decoding it is down here
this is a hydrogen molecule
and this has got one unit and then
the pulsar frequencies are expressed in
units
of the natural vibration of hydrogen so
not in meters per second and kilograms
and
all of those sort of earthly units which
we've made up
but in something universal related to
something
uh that they could independently
calibrate against
very clever idea really as a way of
mapping it
but based on the idea that uh the pulsar
frequencies are very very much
a characteristic that's unlikely to
change
over time and so the point is they they
make incredibly good clocks
and the the latest attempt to try and
find any variation in some of them
is that we are looking at one
microsecond of change
over a ten period which is one part in
10 to the 13 one in 10 trillion
change so 13 decimal digits
no wonder that my attempts with only 10
decimal digits didn't manage to find
anything
but this is very interesting because
what it gives us is a handle on
a number of other pieces of astrophysics
if these clocks are so
good and pulsar timing has already led
to
some interesting discoveries we've found
some binary pulsars where they're
orbiting around each other
and spiraling in because they're giving
off
energy in both electromagnetic energy
and gravity waves and we can measure
that very very precisely by looking at
the
change in the spin and the timing of the
arrival
of the uh signals as they
move towards or away from us in their
co-orbits
they get blue and red shifted so the
pulses arrive either early or late
we've also detected planets orbiting
round
pulsar neutron stars and in fact some of
the first
planets outside the solar system to be
discovered were
found using pulsar timing it's also
able to map the effect of
gravity through uh the
effect that gravity has on stretching
and uh
squishing space as the
uh pulsar beams are moving through the
uh intergalactic and interstellar medium
if there's clouds of dark matter or
other
gravitating material in the way then it
will
curve and change the timing of the
arrival
and so it's being used to try to map the
distribution of matter in in the wider
universe
now of course looking at individual
pulsars you do get
a number of effects you have to worry
about
you have star quakes uh which can be
quite violent on neutron stars as shown
in the left-hand
artist's impression there of uh that can
suddenly change the spin of a neutron
star
the radiation is coming out through the
plasma
that surrounds the neutron star and
effects of the plasma
can cause changes basically changes in
the uh
the space weather around the pulsar
can cause the uh the beam to change
and we have to allow for the motion of
everything and i love this animation on
the
right here this is the sun and its
family of planets
viewed from the point of view of someone
outside the solar system
with the sun hurtling along its path
around the galaxy
and all the planets making a
helical path spiraling around it
and if you're measuring the arrival of
this signal from some
distant pulsar you've got to subtract
out all the doppler
shifts caused by all of the motions of
the sun the moon around the earth the
earth itself
the perturbations of all the other
planets and the movement of the pulsar
doing whatever it's doing too so it gets
very complicated
to do this but
what has been set up is called the
international
pulsar array which is continuously
monitoring
47 different pulsars scattered all over
the sky
and by using nearly 50 different sources
and dealing with as many of those known
errors as we can
we can eliminate some of the residual
random
errors by working out what the average
situation is in terms of the
overall changes to the arrival
times on earth from different pulsars
and this is was being done over a period
of years using the green bank telescope
which is the
one on the left there with the movable
dish and the rather curiously
uh placed antenna on an arm there
and the good old arecibo dish in puerto
rico
which is not steerable and was only able
to point at things that moved
in its line of sight directly overhead
and the idea is that you time the
arrival of the
pulsar signals from this constellation
of
pulsars all around you and can
uh untangle the resulting signal
using uh sophisticated computer analysis
to work out what is going on now of
course there's a bit of a problem
now this is arecibo today
um the hurricane went past and snapped
one of the cables
which led to a catastrophic chain
reaction
and the entire antenna receiver fell
down eventually smashing its way through
to the ground
and completely writing off um the
arecibo receiver so i'm afraid that's
looking very unlikely to ever get
replaced
um the end of a
workhorse that's sort of done so much
good for astronomy
but the pulsar array was used by
a team um actually a multinational team
but led
by the university of rochester um
called the nanograph project and they
took over 12 years of this pulsar timing
data
from the ipa the 70 of the 47 pulsars
and just in january of this year they
announced
that they had detected the background
hum of all of the sources of
gravity waves that are still ringing
around the universe
from very deep back in the uh
beginning of time they've been emitted
from
nearby sources and ones far away
and they're all passing through the
earth all at once
and so you can look to see if the
overall uh perturbation
of the 47 different
direction of lines of sight to the
pulsar array
are all being perturbed in a manner
that gives you that quadrupole effect of
being
squished in one direction and stretched
in the
direction at right angles in
two dimensions as the thing passes
through
and with a three-dimensional array of 47
pulsars giving us this amazing
uh telescope we can observe
which direction these gravity waves are
traveling and how big they
are it's just a matter of the computer
software being able to untangle the fact
that they're all arriving at once
and all overlapping but of course we
have fantastic super computers
and sophisticated software these days
that's beginning to do that
now there's more work to do to start to
actually
untangle this but the fact that it's
been detected at all
is very much a world first and it
wouldn't surprise me if this doesn't
lead to
a nobel prize because it's opening the
door
to a whole new set of observations
another window on the universe
to be able to observe things that we've
just not been able to see
before putting it in context
what we're actually doing is taking a
step
along the gravitational wave spectrum
the ligo and virgo are here
and are able to observe frequencies
in the milliseconds to seconds range
and the hundreds of hertz thousands of
hertz that are in the audio range
and that gives us the ability to detect
things like um
rotating neutron stars supernovae and
black hole mergers that are not too
large so stellar mass
and maybe a little bit above stellar
mass black holes
lisa the interferometer in space can
measure
longer wavelengths and uh these
are going to let us look at supermassive
black holes
um in the mergers of galaxies but
some of the really powerful effects of
truly enormous black holes merging
together
are the sort of thing that pulsar timing
arrays
are going to be able to reveal to us and
right down at this end is the good old
cosmic microwave background radiation
which actually shows us some of the
really long uh
slow moving uh slow changing
gravitational waves right down at this
end of the spectrum
so the pulsar timing array very much
completes our
uh coverage of uh the spectrum of
possible
gravity waves from milliseconds down to
uh
gravity waves that have a wave period of
the age of the whole universe and just
to illustrate that
the cosmic microwave background studies
and this was some work carried out by
chris crowe um
and others in cambridge a few years ago
it's the subject of chris's
phd thesis he was looking for the
imprint of the primordial gravity waves
on that cosmic microwave background
radiation
both in terms of the intensity which is
shown in
red and blue and i think you can see
that there is a pattern there
but he's also looking at the
polarization
of that quadrupole movement
which uh which orientation the the
stretching and squishing had
and you that's indicated by the
directions of the black lines
and i think it's amazing that they are
the black lines are kind of spiraling
around
the red blobs to give it in very
technical language
and i think this is the beginning of
observing some
amazing first structure that is perhaps
even deeper back in time than
we've ever been able to see before
now more speculatively another thing
that the
international pulsar array will
hopefully be able to tell us about
is cosmic strings which are
loops and ripples in the fabric of
space-time
you hear about them in star trek
occasionally and of course they're a
consequence
predicted by some of the versions of
string theory
that you will get these very large
loops and discontinuities uh
in the fabric of space-time created at
the big bang
and that as these move and collide with
each other
and perhaps merge and uh the loops
break and reconnect they will
in theory give off very powerful but
very
long wavelength gravity waves and
we ought to be able to detect these if
they are there at all
because we don't know that this
prediction
is going to turn out to be true but this
is something that
uh the idea of looking at the
cosmic mic cosmic gravity wave
background may reveal to us
it may also be able to tell us something
about the
deepest structure of space-time itself
right down to the quantum level
this is of course fundamental because we
have these two
theories general relativity and quantum
mechanics
which don't play nicely together down at
this
very fine structure quantum mechanics
tells us lots of things about what
happens at very small scales
and general relativity tends to result
in you dividing by
zero for the distance between objects or
a number very close to zero
and getting an infinity in your
mathematics and that's
bad and some of these infinities we just
can't get rid of at the moment
but what we need to understand it better
is more evidence and it may well be that
by studying the cosmic microwave sorry
the cosmic gravity wave background i'm
so used to saying the other term
that we may be able to get a handle on
it
and finally there is uh ideas that the
big bang itself
may have left its imprint on the
uh gravity wave background
and that even events prior to the big
bang
might have uh been
able to imprint themselves on the
structure of space-time
and this is an idea by roger penrose of
oxford who has some amazing
theories one called conformal
cyclic cosmology which basically says
that
big bangs are followed one after another
in turn
and that it may be possible to see
the gravity wave ripples from
a preceding era through
the singularity of a big bang out into
the next
era and even that some of these pictures
on the
right hand side here are showing
evidence of
ripples caused by the gravity waves
from a preceding era making a
series of concentric rings imprinted
on the cosmic microwave background
but by studying the cosmic gravity wave
background we will be able to see if we
see
the same thing by an entirely different
measure because some people say no this
is just
statistical noise that you're joining up
here
and that it's not a real thing and these
rings are
just random chance alignments
a bit like the canals on mars if we
remember back to that story
um but if we saw the same pattern
in the gravity wave background uh the
gravity wave background and the
uh distribution in the cosmic microwaves
of ripples
should be completely
separate independent measures of this
and so if they both show the same thing
then that will very much be
the smoking gun that perhaps roger
penrose is on to something
so a very interesting field and i think
the first step announced in january
is soon going to be followed by a whole
lot of
new discoveries
thank you very much for listening this
afternoon to that hot news
and we'll be back again next saturday
with another interesting topic